docs/Lesson-Learned-GFlowNet-Loss-Explosion-2025-12-27.md, before:

# Lesson Learned: GFlowNet Loss Explosion is Expected Behavior

**Date**: 2025-12-27
**Context**: Analysis of Phase 3b training runs showing late-stage loss divergence

## Summary

All GFlowNet training runs show a "U-shaped" loss curve: loss decreases initially (steps 0-4k), then explodes (steps 6k+). This is **not a training failure** — it's a documented consequence of squared error loss formulation in trajectory balance objectives.

## Key Finding

**Loss explodes while sample quality improves:**

| Stage | Loss | Mean Reward | Diversity |
|-------|------|-------------|-----------|
| Early (1-2k) | ~130 | 0.07 | 0.38 |
| Mid (3-5k) | ~200 | 0.07 | 0.49 |
| Late (7-9k) | ~3200 | **0.89** | **0.84** |

The policy is learning successfully — the loss metric is just not capturing this.

## Technical Explanation

The TB loss is: `L = (log_Z + log_P_F - log_R - log_P_B)²`

As training progresses:
- Policy becomes confident on high-reward sequences → `log_P_F` drops from -7 to -64
- Policy finds better rewards → `log_R` increases from -3.4 to -0.07
- `log_Z` should compensate: `log_Z ≈ log_R - log_P_F ≈ 64`
- But learned `log_Z` only reaches ~5 (learning rate limited)
- Residual grows to ~59 → squared loss = 3500+

**Crucially**: This doesn't mean the policy is bad. It means the flow balance constraint is imperfectly satisfied, but the sampling distribution is still correct.

## Literature Support

1. **"Beyond Squared Error" (arXiv 2024)**: Quadratic loss has "the poorest exploration ability" — this is a known limitation, not a bug.

2. **"On Divergence Measures for Training GFlowNets" (NeurIPS 2024)**: TB loss approximates target distribution well despite high loss values.

3. **"Towards Understanding and Improving GFlowNet Training" (ICML 2023)**: Sample quality is the correct evaluation metric, not loss convergence.

## Our Results Are Publication-Ready

| Metric | Result | Standard | Status |
|--------|--------|----------|--------|
| Sequence Diversity | 0.84-0.89 | > 0.7 | ✅ Excellent |
| Unique Ratio | 1.0 | > 0.9 | ✅ Perfect |
| Mean Reward | 0.93-0.97 | Top quartile | ✅ Strong |
| Mode Collapse | None | None | ✅ Verified |

---

## Proposed Solutions from the Literature

All three papers propose concrete techniques to address loss explosion / training instability:

### Paper 1: "Beyond Squared Error" (arXiv 2024)

**Problem addressed**: Squared error loss has "the poorest exploration ability" and causes the loss explosion.

**Proposed solutions — Alternative loss functions:**

| Loss | Formula | Properties | Use Case |
|------|---------|------------|----------|
| **Linex(1)** | `g(t) = e^t - t - 1` | Zero-avoiding only | More exploration, faster mode discovery |
| **Linex(1/2)** | `g(t) = 4e^(t/2) - 2t - 4` | Neither | Balanced exploration-exploitation |
| **Shifted-Cosh** | `g(t) = e^t + e^(-t) - 2` | Both zero-forcing & zero-avoiding | Best of both worlds |

**Implementation**: Replace squared error in TB loss:
```python
# Standard TB (current):
residual = log_z + log_pf - log_r - log_pb
loss = (residual ** 2).mean()  # g(t) = t²

# Linex(1/2) alternative:
loss = (4 * torch.exp(residual / 2) - 2 * residual - 4).mean()

# Shifted-Cosh alternative:
loss = (torch.exp(residual) + torch.exp(-residual) - 2).mean()
```

**Reported improvement**: Linex achieves mode discovery in 20.3k steps vs 50.6k for squared error (2.5x faster).

### Paper 2: "On Divergence Measures" (NeurIPS 2024)

**Problem addressed**: High gradient variance in TB loss leads to unstable training.

**Proposed solutions — Control variates for variance reduction:**

1. **REINFORCE Leave-One-Out (LOO) estimator**:
```python
# Instead of standard gradient:
# grad = (f - baseline) * grad_log_p

# Use LOO baseline (per-sample):
baseline_i = (sum(f) - f_i) / (N - 1)
grad = (f_i - baseline_i) * grad_log_p_i
```

2. **Batch-based control variate**:
```
â = ⟨Σ ∇ log p_F, Σ ∇f⟩ / (ε + ||Σ ∇ log p_F||²)
```

**Key insight**: TB loss gradient equals 2× reverse KL gradient:
```
∇ E[L_TB] = 2 ∇ D_KL[P_F || P_B]
```

This means you can use alternative divergences (forward KL, Renyi-α, Tsallis-α) with proper gradient estimators.

### Paper 3: "Towards Understanding and Improving GFlowNet Training" (ICML 2023)

**Problem addressed**: Poor sample efficiency and credit assignment in long trajectories.

**Proposed solutions:**

#### 1. Prioritized Replay Training (PRT)
```python
# Batch composition: 50/50 split
# - 50% from top 10% rewards (above 90th percentile)
# - 50% from remaining 90%

def prioritized_sample(replay_buffer, batch_size):
    rewards = [r for _, r in replay_buffer]
    threshold = np.percentile(rewards, 90)

    high_reward = [x for x, r in replay_buffer if r >= threshold]
    low_reward = [x for x, r in replay_buffer if r < threshold]

    batch = random.sample(high_reward, batch_size // 2)
    batch += random.sample(low_reward, batch_size // 2)
    return batch
```

**Reported improvement**: Reduces training rounds from 45,840 to 19,390 (3x faster) on sEH benchmark.

#### 2. Relative Edge Flow Parametrization
Instead of predicting absolute flows, predict relative flows between edges. This improves generalization.

#### 3. Guided Trajectory Balance (GTB)
A modified TB objective that provides better credit assignment for substructures shared among high-reward samples.

---

## Practical Recommendations for This Codebase

Given the current setup, here are actionable options ranked by implementation effort:

### Option A: Quick Win — Prioritized Replay (Low effort)
```python
# In TrajectorySampler or training loop:
# Keep a replay buffer of (trajectory, reward) pairs
# Sample 50% from top 10% by reward
```

### Option B: Moderate — Alternative Loss Function (Medium effort)
```python
# In gflownet_peptide/training/loss.py, add:

class LinexTrajectoryBalanceLoss(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, alpha=0.5, ...):
        self.alpha = alpha  # 0.5 or 1.0

    def forward(self, log_pf_sum, log_pb_sum, log_rewards, ...):
        residual = self.log_z + log_pf_sum - log_rewards - log_pb_sum

        if self.alpha == 1.0:
            # Linex(1): exploration-focused
            loss = (torch.exp(residual) - residual - 1).mean()
        elif self.alpha == 0.5:
            # Linex(1/2): balanced
            loss = (4 * torch.exp(residual / 2) - 2 * residual - 4).mean()

        return loss
```

### Option C: Advanced — Control Variates (Higher effort)
Implement leave-one-out baseline for gradient estimation. More complex but addresses root cause.

---

## Should We Implement These for Publication?

**Short answer: Not required, but could strengthen the paper.**

| Situation | Recommendation |
|-----------|----------------|
| Need to publish quickly | Proceed as-is; cite these papers as "future work" |
| Have time for experiments | Try Prioritized Replay (Option A) — low effort, proven gains |
| Reviewers request improvements | Implement Linex loss (Option B) as a response |

Current results (diversity 0.84-0.89, reward 0.95+) are already publication-quality. These optimizations would be "nice to have" but not essential.

---

## Recommendations for Publication

### Do:
- Focus on sample quality metrics (diversity, reward distribution, unique ratio)
- Use early stopping — metrics plateau around step 5-6k
- Report best checkpoint, not final checkpoint
- Cite 2024 literature if reviewers question loss curves

### Don't:
- Show loss curves without context
- Claim loss "converges"
- Train longer hoping loss will decrease
- Worry that this invalidates the method

### If Reviewers Ask

> "The TB loss measures flow constraint satisfaction rather than sample quality; divergence between loss and sample metrics has been characterized in recent work [1,2]. We evaluate our method on sample quality metrics following standard practice in the GFlowNet literature."

---

## References

1. Hu et al. "Beyond Squared Error: Exploring Loss Design for Enhanced Training of Generative Flow Networks" (arXiv 2024) https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02596
2. da Silva et al. "On Divergence Measures for Training GFlowNets" (NeurIPS 2024) https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.09355
3. Shen et al. "Towards Understanding and Improving GFlowNet Training" (ICML 2023) https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07170
4. Rector-Brooks et al. "Local Search GFlowNets" https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02710 — References PRT implementation details
5. Lahlou et al. "torchgfn: A PyTorch GFlowNet library" https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14594

## Analyzed Runs

| Run | ID | Diversity | Mean Reward | Loss (final) |
|-----|----|-----------|-------------|--------------|
| phase3b-stb-validation | nodeps9c | 0.84 | 0.95 | 3791 |
| phase3b-entropy-0.00 | zv30wmny | 0.89 | 0.97 | 5071 |
| reward-C-improved | zcb95gyl | 0.82 | 0.97 | 3379 |

## Bottom Line

The loss explosion is a **documented phenomenon** in GFlowNet training with squared error loss. Sample quality metrics demonstrate the method works. **Proceed with publication.**

For future improvements, consider implementing Prioritized Replay (easiest) or Linex loss (moderate effort) based on the 2023-2024 literature.

Commit message:

docs: add cross-reference to step 6000 analysis memo

docs/Lesson-Learned-GFlowNet-Loss-Explosion-2025-12-27.md, after:

# Lesson Learned: GFlowNet Loss Explosion is Expected Behavior

**Date**: 2025-12-27
**Context**: Analysis of Phase 3b training runs showing late-stage loss divergence

## Summary

All GFlowNet training runs show a "U-shaped" loss curve: loss decreases initially (steps 0-4k), then explodes (steps 6k+). This is **not a training failure** — it's a documented consequence of squared error loss formulation in trajectory balance objectives.

## Key Finding

**Loss explodes while sample quality improves:**

| Stage | Loss | Mean Reward | Diversity |
|-------|------|-------------|-----------|
| Early (1-2k) | ~130 | 0.07 | 0.38 |
| Mid (3-5k) | ~200 | 0.07 | 0.49 |
| Late (7-9k) | ~3200 | **0.89** | **0.84** |

The policy is learning successfully — the loss metric is just not capturing this.

## Technical Explanation

The TB loss is: `L = (log_Z + log_P_F - log_R - log_P_B)²`

As training progresses:
- Policy becomes confident on high-reward sequences → `log_P_F` drops from -7 to -64
- Policy finds better rewards → `log_R` increases from -3.4 to -0.07
- `log_Z` should compensate: `log_Z ≈ log_R - log_P_F ≈ 64`
- But learned `log_Z` only reaches ~5 (learning rate limited)
- Residual grows to ~59 → squared loss = 3500+

**Crucially**: This doesn't mean the policy is bad. It means the flow balance constraint is imperfectly satisfied, but the sampling distribution is still correct.

## Literature Support

1. **"Beyond Squared Error" (arXiv 2024)**: Quadratic loss has "the poorest exploration ability" — this is a known limitation, not a bug.

2. **"On Divergence Measures for Training GFlowNets" (NeurIPS 2024)**: TB loss approximates target distribution well despite high loss values.

3. **"Towards Understanding and Improving GFlowNet Training" (ICML 2023)**: Sample quality is the correct evaluation metric, not loss convergence.

## Our Results Are Publication-Ready

| Metric | Result | Standard | Status |
|--------|--------|----------|--------|
| Sequence Diversity | 0.84-0.89 | > 0.7 | ✅ Excellent |
| Unique Ratio | 1.0 | > 0.9 | ✅ Perfect |
| Mean Reward | 0.93-0.97 | Top quartile | ✅ Strong |
| Mode Collapse | None | None | ✅ Verified |

---

## Proposed Solutions from the Literature

All three papers propose concrete techniques to address loss explosion / training instability:

### Paper 1: "Beyond Squared Error" (arXiv 2024)

**Problem addressed**: Squared error loss has "the poorest exploration ability" and causes the loss explosion.

**Proposed solutions — Alternative loss functions:**

| Loss | Formula | Properties | Use Case |
|------|---------|------------|----------|
| **Linex(1)** | `g(t) = e^t - t - 1` | Zero-avoiding only | More exploration, faster mode discovery |
| **Linex(1/2)** | `g(t) = 4e^(t/2) - 2t - 4` | Neither | Balanced exploration-exploitation |
| **Shifted-Cosh** | `g(t) = e^t + e^(-t) - 2` | Both zero-forcing & zero-avoiding | Best of both worlds |

**Implementation**: Replace squared error in TB loss:
```python
# Standard TB (current):
residual = log_z + log_pf - log_r - log_pb
loss = (residual ** 2).mean()  # g(t) = t²

# Linex(1/2) alternative:
loss = (4 * torch.exp(residual / 2) - 2 * residual - 4).mean()

# Shifted-Cosh alternative:
loss = (torch.exp(residual) + torch.exp(-residual) - 2).mean()
```

**Reported improvement**: Linex achieves mode discovery in 20.3k steps vs 50.6k for squared error (2.5x faster).

### Paper 2: "On Divergence Measures" (NeurIPS 2024)

**Problem addressed**: High gradient variance in TB loss leads to unstable training.

**Proposed solutions — Control variates for variance reduction:**

1. **REINFORCE Leave-One-Out (LOO) estimator**:
```python
# Instead of standard gradient:
# grad = (f - baseline) * grad_log_p

# Use LOO baseline (per-sample):
baseline_i = (sum(f) - f_i) / (N - 1)
grad = (f_i - baseline_i) * grad_log_p_i
```

2. **Batch-based control variate**:
```
â = ⟨Σ ∇ log p_F, Σ ∇f⟩ / (ε + ||Σ ∇ log p_F||²)
```

**Key insight**: TB loss gradient equals 2× reverse KL gradient:
```
∇ E[L_TB] = 2 ∇ D_KL[P_F || P_B]
```

This means you can use alternative divergences (forward KL, Renyi-α, Tsallis-α) with proper gradient estimators.

### Paper 3: "Towards Understanding and Improving GFlowNet Training" (ICML 2023)

**Problem addressed**: Poor sample efficiency and credit assignment in long trajectories.

**Proposed solutions:**

#### 1. Prioritized Replay Training (PRT)
```python
# Batch composition: 50/50 split
# - 50% from top 10% rewards (above 90th percentile)
# - 50% from remaining 90%

def prioritized_sample(replay_buffer, batch_size):
    rewards = [r for _, r in replay_buffer]
    threshold = np.percentile(rewards, 90)

    high_reward = [x for x, r in replay_buffer if r >= threshold]
    low_reward = [x for x, r in replay_buffer if r < threshold]

    batch = random.sample(high_reward, batch_size // 2)
    batch += random.sample(low_reward, batch_size // 2)
    return batch
```

**Reported improvement**: Reduces training rounds from 45,840 to 19,390 (3x faster) on sEH benchmark.

#### 2. Relative Edge Flow Parametrization
Instead of predicting absolute flows, predict relative flows between edges. This improves generalization.

#### 3. Guided Trajectory Balance (GTB)
A modified TB objective that provides better credit assignment for substructures shared among high-reward samples.

---

## Practical Recommendations for This Codebase

Given the current setup, here are actionable options ranked by implementation effort:

### Option A: Quick Win — Prioritized Replay (Low effort)
```python
# In TrajectorySampler or training loop:
# Keep a replay buffer of (trajectory, reward) pairs
# Sample 50% from top 10% by reward
```

### Option B: Moderate — Alternative Loss Function (Medium effort)
```python
# In gflownet_peptide/training/loss.py, add:

class LinexTrajectoryBalanceLoss(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, alpha=0.5, ...):
        self.alpha = alpha  # 0.5 or 1.0

    def forward(self, log_pf_sum, log_pb_sum, log_rewards, ...):
        residual = self.log_z + log_pf_sum - log_rewards - log_pb_sum

        if self.alpha == 1.0:
            # Linex(1): exploration-focused
            loss = (torch.exp(residual) - residual - 1).mean()
        elif self.alpha == 0.5:
            # Linex(1/2): balanced
            loss = (4 * torch.exp(residual / 2) - 2 * residual - 4).mean()

        return loss
```

### Option C: Advanced — Control Variates (Higher effort)
Implement leave-one-out baseline for gradient estimation. More complex but addresses root cause.

---

## Should We Implement These for Publication?

**Short answer: Not required, but could strengthen the paper.**

| Situation | Recommendation |
|-----------|----------------|
| Need to publish quickly | Proceed as-is; cite these papers as "future work" |
| Have time for experiments | Try Prioritized Replay (Option A) — low effort, proven gains |
| Reviewers request improvements | Implement Linex loss (Option B) as a response |

Current results (diversity 0.84-0.89, reward 0.95+) are already publication-quality. These optimizations would be "nice to have" but not essential.

---

## Recommendations for Publication

### Do:
- Focus on sample quality metrics (diversity, reward distribution, unique ratio)
- Use early stopping — metrics plateau around step 5-6k
- Report best checkpoint, not final checkpoint
- Cite 2024 literature if reviewers question loss curves

### Don't:
- Show loss curves without context
- Claim loss "converges"
- Train longer hoping loss will decrease
- Worry that this invalidates the method

### If Reviewers Ask

> "The TB loss measures flow constraint satisfaction rather than sample quality; divergence between loss and sample metrics has been characterized in recent work [1,2]. We evaluate our method on sample quality metrics following standard practice in the GFlowNet literature."

---

## References

1. Hu et al. "Beyond Squared Error: Exploring Loss Design for Enhanced Training of Generative Flow Networks" (arXiv 2024) https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02596
2. da Silva et al. "On Divergence Measures for Training GFlowNets" (NeurIPS 2024) https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.09355
3. Shen et al. "Towards Understanding and Improving GFlowNet Training" (ICML 2023) https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07170
4. Rector-Brooks et al. "Local Search GFlowNets" https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02710 — References PRT implementation details
5. Lahlou et al. "torchgfn: A PyTorch GFlowNet library" https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14594

## Analyzed Runs

| Run | ID | Diversity | Mean Reward | Loss (final) |
|-----|----|-----------|-------------|--------------|
| phase3b-stb-validation | nodeps9c | 0.84 | 0.95 | 3791 |
| phase3b-entropy-0.00 | zv30wmny | 0.89 | 0.97 | 5071 |
| reward-C-improved | zcb95gyl | 0.82 | 0.97 | 3379 |

## Related Documentation

For a detailed analysis of why the loss explosion occurs specifically around step 6000, see:
- [Memo: TB Loss Explosion Step 6000 Analysis](Memo-TB-Loss-Explosion-Step6000-Analysis.md)

---

## Bottom Line

The loss explosion is a **documented phenomenon** in GFlowNet training with squared error loss. Sample quality metrics demonstrate the method works. **Proceed with publication.**

For future improvements, consider implementing Prioritized Replay (easiest) or Linex loss (moderate effort) based on the 2023-2024 literature.
